Name: Andrew Voyles
Date: 18 September 2016

Assignment 1: Neutron Transport and Nonproliferation





One of the major programs of the NNSA is furthering their mission of reducing radiological dangers, through improved treaty and materials verification, as well as identification of special nuclear materials (SNMs). To accurately identify special nuclear materials in these scenarios, as well as be able to positively or negatively identify an unknown object as containing stated quantities of these materials, an accurate and robust understanding of particle transport is required. As most charged particle emissions from SNM will be self-shielded by either the material itself (or structural components surrounding the SNM), neutral particle transport (namely, of photons, neutrons, and neutrinos) is the most important tool in modeling, identifying, and eventually interdicting these materials.

Neutrino transport is a difficult field, due to the fact that both neutrinos and antineutrinos are so extremely weakly interacting with matter. However, due to the fact that neutrino & antineutrino flux is highly correlated with the power level of a thermal reactor, as well the particular isotopics and enrichment levels of SNM, they pose a promising tool for monitoring and nonproliferation activities. In particular, the highly-penetrating nature of neutrinos allows for these measurements to be performed at tens to hundreds of kilometers of standoff. In addition, the results of several recent large neutrino experiments (namely, Daya Bay and Double-Chooz) have provided improved measurements of the mixing angles for neutrino flavor oscillations. These allow for better predictions of the relative neutrino flavor distributions, as a function of distance from source. Since fission and beta decay produce a purely electron-type neutrino flux, these oscillations can be used as a "time-of-flight" measurement for pinpointing the distance from a neutrino source. Notable NA-22 funded projects, such as WATCHMAN, can use these improved neutrino transport properties to triangulate a neutrino source, and identify its particular isotopics.

In more conventional transport, neutrons are a topic of massive interest by NNSA and NA-22, due to their intrinsic connection with fissile and fissionable materials. One of the major issues facing modern neutron transport is the growing realization that our existing body of nuclear data for neutron inelastic scattering is extremely poor. For any neutron transport problem, whether it is modeling the criticality of an assembly of SNM, or creating a "fingerprint" of a weapons package for treaty verification, (n,f) cross sections are commonly viewed as the highest-priority. However, inelastic scattering, particularly on the high-Z elements used as structural materials in such packages, is the dominant mechanism by which neutrons are initially downscattered from fission energies to the thermal energies needed to fission SNM, especially through the resonance region. Current nuclear data libraries use existing measurements of such cross sections, along with nuclear reaction modeling codes (such as Empire and TALYS) to predict these cross sections when empirical measurements are unavailable. Unfortunately, due to the process in which nuclear data is evaluated, inelastic scattering often becomes a "garbage bin" used to catch and compensate for uncertainties in other transport cross sections, leading to significant uncertainties (of 40% and upwards) in inelastic scattering cross sections. These massive uncertainties, in turn, provide little confidence in the modeled cross sections used to fill in experimental gaps in ENDF and other nuclear data libraries. This massive shortcoming in international nuclear data is beginning to come to light, often through incidents embarrassing to the nuclear community. Notably, recent comparisons of various nuclear data libraries have revealed as much as +/- 6% differences in the estimation of k_eff for integral critical assemblies, primarily due to as much as 15% variations in the inelastic scattering cross sections between these libraries. In addition, the unexpected positive reactivity coefficient in the recent commissioning testing of the Canadian MAPLE II reactors are believed to primarily be due to poor inelastic scattering cross sections used in the design of these reactors. All of these deficiencies are just one example of the problems facing neutron transport in highly-sensitive applications, such as modeling for weapons treaty and device verification. NA-22 is committed to improving these aspects of neutron transport, through funding of more integral test experiments, as well as improved nuclear data.


